Trends in

Genetics

OPEN ACCESS

Feature Review

The sound of silence: mechanisms and
implications of HUSH complex function
Marta Seczynska1,@,* and Paul J. Lehner

1,

*

The vertebrate genome is under constant threat of invasion by genetic parasites.
Whether the host can immediately recognize and respond to invading elements
has been unclear. The discovery of the human silencing hub (HUSH) complex,
and the ﬁnding that it provides immediate protection from genome invasion by
silencing products of reverse transcription, have important implications for
mammalian genome evolution. In this review, we summarize recent insights
into HUSH function and describe how cellular introns provide a novel means of
self–nonself discrimination, allowing HUSH to recognize and transcriptionally repress a broad range of intronless genetic elements. We discuss how HUSH contributes to genome evolution, and highlight studies reporting the critical role of
HUSH in development and implicating HUSH in the control of immune signaling
and cancer progression.

Highlights

When ‘nonself’ becomes ‘self’: genome defense and co-option

HUSH – a complex of transcription activation suppressor (TASOR), M-phase
phosphoprotein 8 (MPP8), and
periphilin – is an RNA-mediated transcriptional silencing system. Periphilin
binds RNA and guides HUSH to its target loci where HUSH recruits Su(var)39, Enhancer-of-zeste and Trithorax
(SET) domain bifurcated histone lysine
methyltransferase 1 (SETDB1) to deposit histone 3 lysine 9 trimethylation
(H3K9me3) and additional effectors:
microrchidia CW-type zinc ﬁnger 2
(MORC2) and the nuclear exosome
targeting (NEXT) complex. H3K9me3
is bound by MPP8, helps to maintain
HUSH at the locus, but may be dispensable for repression.

The epigenetic repressor human silencing hub (HUSH) emerges as a
critical genome defense pathway.
HUSH safeguards the genome
against retroelement invasion and
controls the reverse ﬂow of genetic information (RNA–DNA) in mammalian
genomes.
Long, intronless complementary DNA
(cDNA), the characteristic of RNA-derived elements, enables HUSH to discriminate ‘nonself’ intronless invading
DNAs from ‘self’ intron-containing host
genes.

The ability to discriminate self from nonself is the hallmark of the immune system, and is particularly
important in the recognition of nucleic acid and defense against invading pathogens [1]. Vertebrates are equipped with a dazzling array of nucleic acid receptors which recognize foreign, incoming DNA and RNA, and induce a cell-autonomous immune response against invading pathogens
[2]. An efﬁcient response requires sensing of foreign nucleic acids while ignoring self nucleic
acids. Such discrimination can be challenging, as some pathogens integrate into the host genome
and become ‘self’. Integration into the genome beneﬁts these pathogens, as they can utilize host
machinery to replicate, but can also beneﬁt the host as these genetic parasites provide a source
of genetic material which can be co-opted (co-option, see Glossary) and contribute to host genome evolution through molecular domestication [3–5]. Indeed, nearly half of the human genome
is made up of genetic parasites such as viruses and transposons [6], some of which remain mobile
and continue to spread (Box 1). The acquisition of genetic parasites by the host genome necessitates cooperation between genome defense pathways that must recognize and control the spread
of invading elements and pathways that utilize element-derived sequences for host genome regulatory functions (Box 2). Understanding how the host recognizes and controls ‘nonself’ genetic parasites to defend the genome against their activity and ultimately co-opt them for its own beneﬁt
remains a fundamental question in biology and is key to understanding human genome evolution.
Most eukaryotic genomes are dominated by retroelements (retrotransposons and retroviruses) with minimal DNA transposon accumulation. Being RNA-derived, retroelements are reverse transcribed to complementary DNA (cDNA) and integrated into the host genome. The
ﬁnding that 42% of the human genome is retroelement-derived emphasizes the dominant role
of these products of reverse transcription and the reverse transcriptase enzyme itself in shaping
our genome [6]. But how can the host cell distinguish integrated retroelement-derived DNA from
its own genes (self DNA) to control its activity? That is, are integrated retroelements visible to the
immune system, or do they remain in stealth mode and undetected? Our discovery and

HUSH is critical for embryonic development, has far-reaching implications for
genome evolution, and has relevance
for cancer and gene therapies.

1

Cambridge Institute for Therapeutic
Immunology & Infectious Disease, Jeffrey
Cheah Biomedical Centre, Cambridge
Biomedical Campus, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0AW, UK

Trends in Genetics, April 2023, Vol. 39, No. 4 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tig.2022.12.005
© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

251

Trends in Genetics
OPEN ACCESS

Box 1. Transposable element classiﬁcation and contribution to genetic innovation
Nearly half of our genome can be traced to transposable elements [71]. There are many different types of transposons,
with two major classes – retrotransposons and DNA transposons – distinguished on the basis of the mechanism used
to spread within the genome [72,73]. Retrotransposons replicate via a ‘copy-and-paste’ mechanism which uses an
RNA intermediate; the RNA is reverse transcribed into a cDNA copy and integrated into the genome [72]. In contrast,
the majority of DNA transposons mobilize through a cut-and-paste mechanism, in which the transposon itself is excised
and moved to a new genomic location, usually with the help of the transposon-encoded enzyme [74,75]. Both classes of
transposable elements can be subdivided further, deﬁned primarily according to the mechanisms of replication and/or
chromosomal integration [73]. Thus, retrotransposons are divided into: (i) long terminal repeat (LTR) retrotransposons,
for which the integration occurs via a cleavage and strand-transfer reaction catalyzed by an integrase [76], similar to retroviruses, and (ii) non-LTR retrotransposons, including long and short interspersed nuclear elements (LINEs, SINEs),
and SINE-VNTR-Alu (SVAs), for which chromosomal integration is coupled to reverse transcription through a process
called target-primed reverse transcription (TPRT) [77]. In TPRT, reverse transcriptase uses the L1 RNA as a template to
extend the 3′-OH group which is revealed at the L1 target site of chromosomal DNA following a nick from the L1 endonuclease. Each retrotransposon subclass can be further divided into superfamilies and families which are characterized in
terms of their phylogenetic relationships.
Transposons provides their host with a rich source of raw genetic material for genome evolution. They facilitate the formation
of new genes (Box 5), donate regulatory sequences that inﬂuence host gene expression, modify 3D chromatin structure, and
give rise to novel proteins and regulatory components, including transcription factors and noncoding RNAs [3–6,78].

characterization of the HUSH epigenetic repressor complex uncovered an unanticipated mechanism for discriminating ‘self’ from ‘nonself’ DNA and the control of retroelement activity within the
genome; this has important implications for genome regulation and evolution. HUSH is a versatile,
cell-autonomous genome defense system, which transcriptionally represses RNA-derived
elements, including long interspersed element-1 (LINE1, L1), the only autonomous mobile
transposon in humans. By silencing products of reverse transcription, HUSH controls the reverse
ﬂow of genetic information within the genome. In this review we discuss recent advances in our
understanding of HUSH function: how HUSH recognizes and silences its targets, how it provides
innate immunity against genome invasion, and how it may cooperate with other cellular
pathways to control mobile DNAs. We also highlight emerging studies that describe the critical
role of HUSH during development, and implicate HUSH in the control of immune signaling and
cancer progression.

The HUSH complex safeguards the genome against retroelement invasion
The HUSH complex is a heterotrimer, composed of transcription activation suppressor (TASOR),
M-phase phosphoprotein 8 (MPP8), and periphilin, and is conserved from ﬁsh to mammals.
HUSH was ﬁrst identiﬁed through forward genetic screens for factors required for the silencing
of a subset of viral integrations [7] (Box 3). To silence newly integrated retroviruses, HUSH recruits
two effectors: MORC2, an ATP-dependent chromatin remodeler which compacts chromatin,
and SETDB1, a histone methyltransferase which deposits histone 3 lysine 9 trimethylation
(H3K9me3) at the target loci [7,8] (Figure 1). These initial studies, along with a genetic screen
which identiﬁed the HUSH member, TASOR (c3orf63), as an antiviral factor [9], showed a role
for HUSH in silencing HIV-1, the most clinically important lentivirus. By silencing a subset of
HIV integrations, HUSH contributes to the establishment and maintenance of latent HIV
[7,10,11], which is transcriptionally silenced but replication-competent, and therefore has the potential to reactivate. A wider role for HUSH in preserving genome integrity emerged when HUSH
was found to silence endogenous L1 retrotransposons [12,13]. A genome-wide screen revealed
that HUSH, MORC2, and SETDB1 are also critical components for restriction of L1
retrotransposition in human somatic cells [12]. HUSH/MORC2 represses endogenous L1 transcription and promotes H3K9me3 deposition at the L1 loci [12,13]. Together these results
show that HUSH restricts retroelements whether they attack the genome from outside the cell
(retroviruses) or from within (retrotransposons). Importantly, only a subset of L1s are silenced
by HUSH: full-length, evolutionarily young, and transcriptionally active L1s [12,13], precisely the
252

Trends in Genetics, April 2023, Vol. 39, No. 4

*Correspondence:
mms67@cam.ac.uk (M. Seczynska) and
pjl30@cam.ac.uk (P.J. Lehner).
@
Twitter: @seczynska

Trends in Genetics
OPEN ACCESS

Box 2. The control of transposable elements.

Glossary

To silence and control transposable elements, eukaryotes rely on an array of complex, interconnected epigenetic mechanisms: small RNAs, KRAB-ZFPs, DNA methylation, histone modiﬁcations, and RNA modiﬁcations [5]. A specialized genome
defense pathway (the piRNA pathway) controls active transposons in the germline. P-element-induced Wimpy testis (PIWI)interacting RNAs (piRNAs) guide PIWI proteins to cleave complementary transposon transcripts and promote repressive
chromatin at the transposon loci [69]. The function of the piRNA pathway in genome defense is clearly conserved, but the
silencing machinery and mechanisms differ among different species [58]. piRNAs are often derived from piRNA clusters, genomic loci enriched in transposon-derived sequences. The piRNA pathway thus relies on the memory of past transposon
invasions to provide adaptive, sequence-based control of transposon activity with conceptual similarities to the adaptive immune system. The piRNA pathway recognizes the threat, stimulates and ampliﬁes a response (through so-called ping-pong
cycle ampliﬁcation of piRNAs), and establishes a memory of the encounter to neutralize similar threats in the future (through
piRNA cluster formation). In Drosophila melanogaster, maternal deposition of piRNAs and PIWI proteins in oocytes provides
its progeny with some innate immunity to transposons [79], but this mechanism is absent from mammals. It is unclear
whether the piRNA pathway can provide innate immunity to transposons in mammals and respond to completely novel genetic invaders. A recent study on retroviruses actively invading koalas shows that unspliced transcripts from new retroviral
insertions are directly processed into piRNAs, illustrating a mechanism by which the piRNA pathway can respond to a
completely novel invader [80], but whether this can be extrapolated to other genome-invading elements remains unknown.
A large family of sequence-speciﬁc DNA-binding proteins KRAB-ZFPs help the host to co-opt mobile genetic elements for its
beneﬁt. Through interaction with tripartite motif containing 28 (TRIM28), KRAB-ZFPs recruit the Su(var)3-9, Enhancer-of-zeste
and Trithorax (SET) domain bifurcated histone lysine methyltransferase 1 (SETDB1) to deposit histone 3 lysine 9 trimethylation
(H3K9me3) at target loci. By binding and controlling transposon-derived regulatory sequences, KRAB-ZFPs orchestrate cellspeciﬁc gene regulation in developing and adult tissues and this regulation is an important driver of primate evolution. KRAB-ZFPs
emerged in the last common ancestor of the coelacanth, lungﬁsh, and tetrapods [67], and have rapidly expanded and diversiﬁed in
response to invading waves of transposons. The current model of interactions between KRAB-ZFPs and transposons integrates
both the arms race and domestication models: KRAB-ZFPs and transposons compete with each other, with the KRAB-ZFP
pathway continuously trying to suppress mutating transposons through the evolution of novel KRAB-ZFP genes. Over time,
transposons accumulate mutations and lose their transcriptional potential. Some may undergo positive selection and become ﬁxed
in the genome because they fulﬁl beneﬁcial functions to the host. KRAB-ZFPs themselves might participate in this domestication by
evolving additional functions to repress transposon transcription. The KRAB-ZFP pathway is an elegant example of coadaptation between host genome and its mobile DNA content, but because it depends on new gene evolution and
transposon mutations, it is relatively slow. This gives young, active transposons the opportunity to cause major damage until
such adaptation occurs. How this threat is alleviated, in particular in somatic cells where the piRNA pathway is absent, was
unclear. The discovery of the HUSH complex and the ﬁnding that it provides immediate protection by silencing diverse
invading DNAs places HUSH at the forefront of genome defense and may provide the answer to this question.

elements that pose the greatest threat to genome integrity, because they remain mobile and/or
affect transcription of neighboring genes. Silencing of such L1 elements is highly speciﬁc, as
L1s constitute the majority of the HUSH-repressed endogenous loci. Only a small subset of
other endogenous loci (<200) harbor HUSH-mediated H3K9me3, the majority of which are 3′
long exons of transcribed Krüppel-associated box domain (KRAB) KRAB-containing
zinc-finger protein (KRAB-ZFP) genes [7,8,12–15]. The HUSH complex therefore appeared

Box 3. Discovery of the HUSH complex
The HUSH complex was discovered by the Lehner laboratory through a forward genetic screen for the regulators of positioneffect variegation in human cells. Position-effect variegation refers to the differences in expression of an identical gene as a
result of its position at different genomic sites, usually due to epigenetic silencing of the gene [81]. The Lehner laboratory utilized
insertional mutagenesis to perform a genetic screen in the haploid human KBM7 cell line for genes required for epigenetic
silencing of a subset of lentiviral integrations [7]. Following transduction with a lentiviral green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP) reporter,
the majority of cells displayed high GFP expression (GFPbright population). However, as a result of reporter integration in the
proximity of H3K9me3-rich heterochromatin, a subset of cells showed low GFP expression (GFPdim population). By isolating
mutant cells which failed to maintain silencing of the GFP reporter following insertional mutagenesis (i.e., a population that
became GFPbright), epigenetic factors essential for position-mediated epigenetic silencing were identiﬁed. These included
proteins encoded by SETDB1, a histone lysine methyltransferase, and three less well-characterized factors FAM208A/
TASOR, MPHOSPH8 [encoding M-phase phosphoprotein 8 (MPP8)], and PPHLN1 (encoding periphilin). Subsequent
proteomic and biochemical analyses revealed that TASOR, MPP8, and periphilin form a stable heterotrimeric complex,
which the Lehner laboratory named HUSH (human silencing hub). The discovery of the HUSH complex, along with
the subsequent identiﬁcation of MORC2 as an essential HUSH-recruited chromatin remodeler [8,17], and ATF7IP as
an essential SETDB1 chaperone [21,22], deﬁned a novel epigenetic silencing pathway in human cells.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML): a
malignant cancer of the bone marrow in
which hematopoietic precursors are
arrested in an early stage of development;
the most common type of acute leukemia
in adults.
Adeno-associated virus (AAV): a
nonenveloped single-stranded DNA virus
that can be engineered to deliver DNA to
target cells; it persists as episomes
(nonintegrated DNAs) in the nucleus of
transduced cells.
Arms race: the conﬂict between two
competing parties; here, transposons and
host machineries that control them,
continuously imposing selective pressures
on each other.
Chromodomain: a structural protein
domain of approximately 40–50 amino
acid residues, commonly found in proteins
associated with chromatin, which
recognizes methylation marks on
histones.
CNOT1 RNA degradation pathway:
CNOT1 is a scaffolding component of
CCR4-NOT1, one of the major cellular
mRNA deadenylases linked to mRNA
degradation.
Co-option: the process through which
transposable elements are selected for a
variety of novel functions that may provide
an adaptive beneﬁt to their hosts.
Domestication: the process through
which transposons gradually become
integrated into the host’s regulatory
networks (closely related to co-option).
HIV-1: a lentivirus that infects human
immune cells; a cause of AIDS.
Immune checkpoint blockade (ICB):
a type of cancer immunotherapy that
focuses on the termination of immune
responses by inhibiting immune
suppressor molecules.
KRAB-containing zinc-finger
proteins (KRAB-ZFPs): a family of
proteins with an N-terminal KRAB domain
and a C-terminal C2H2 zinc ﬁnger array.
Krüppel-associated box domain
(KRAB): protein domain associated
primarily with potent transcriptional
repression via the association with the
corepressor KAP1.
Lentiviral: derived from lentiviruses, a
type of retroviruses that can infect both
dividing and nondividing cells; lentiviral
vectors are derived from the HIV-1 and
have been used extensively as gene
transfer tools.
Lentivirus: a type of single-stranded
RNA virus that reverse transcribes its
RNA genome and integrates the cDNA

Trends in Genetics, April 2023, Vol. 39, No. 4

253

Trends in Genetics
OPEN ACCESS

(A)
HUSH complex
TASOR

ATF7IP SETDB1
H3K9me3

Periphilin
MPP8

Nascent
transcript

Me Me
Me

Me Me
Me

Me Me
Me

RNAP II

MORC2
Retroelement

(B)
TASOR

PARP

(inactive)

SPOC DomI
MPP8 binding

MPP8

CD

S-rich

Periphilin binding
(1014-1095 aa)

860 aa

H3K9me3 binding
ATF7IP/SETDB1 interaction

Periphilin

ankyrin repeats

helix 374 aa

HUSH complex

TASOR binding (297-374 aa)
homodimerization

SETDB1

MBD

PreSET SET

Tudor domains

MORC2

GHKL

1670 aa

DomII PIN

CC1 trans
CW CC2
ATPase

SET 1291 aa
PostSET

CC3 1032 aa
TCD

TASOR & MPP8 binding

HUSH effectors
Trends in Genetics

Figure 1. Human silencing hub (HUSH) – a complex of transcription activation suppressor (TASOR), M-phase
phosphoprotein 8 (MPP8), and periphilin – is an epigenetic repressor which promotes deposition of histone 3
lysine 9 trimethylation (H3K9me3). (A) Schematic representation of the mechanism of HUSH recruitment and function. HUSH
is recruited to transcribed target loci through periphilin binding to nascent RNA. MPP8 then recruits Su(var)3-9, Enhancer-of-zeste
and Trithorax (SET) domain bifurcated histone lysine methyltransferase 1 (SETDB1) through an interaction with SETDB1 nuclear
chaperone activating transcription factor 7 interacting protein (ATF7IP); SETDB1 deposits H3K9me3, which is in turn bound by
MPP8, maintaining HUSH at the locus. HUSH also recruits microrchidia CW-type zinc ﬁnger 2 (MORC2), an ATP-dependent
chromatin remodeler. (B) Schematic representation of the domain structures of the core HUSH complex subunits: TASOR, MPP8,
periphilin, and HUSH effector proteins SETDB1 and MORC2. Abbreviations: CC, coiled-coil domain; CD, chromodomain; CW,
CW-type zinc ﬁnger domain; DomI, domain I; DomII, domain II; GHKL, gyrase, histidine kinase, and MutL domain; helix, helices;
MBD, methyl-binding domain; Me, methyl; PARP, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase domain; PIN, PiIT N terminus; RNAP II, RNA
polymerase II; S-rich, serine-rich domain; SPOC, Spen paralog and ortholog C-terminal domain; TCD, Tudor-chromodomain.

as cellular machinery which controlled L1 activity and was speciﬁcally ‘programmed’ to target L1
elements for repression. However, a recent study showed that HUSH function extends well beyond control of L1s. To understand how HUSH recognizes incoming L1s, we mimicked L1
254

Trends in Genetics, April 2023, Vol. 39, No. 4

into the host genome. A lentivirus (unlike
a retrovirus) can infect both dividing and
nondividing cells.
Long interspersed element-1
(LINE-1, L1): an autonomous, non-LTR
retrotransposon which constitutes ~17%
of the human genome. The only mobile
transposon in humans, it replicates
through an RNA intermediate and
encodes two proteins: ORF1p, which has
nonsequence-speciﬁc RNA-binding
activity, and ORF2p, an endonuclease
and reverse transcriptase.
Mouse embryonic stem cells
(mESCs): cells derived from inner cell
mass of the developing blastocyst;
mESCs are able to self-renew indeﬁnitely
in vitro while preserving ‘naive’
pluripotency (the developmental potential
to reconstitute all embryonic lineages).
Murine leukemia virus (MLV): the
prototypical gammaretrovirus and one of
the simplest retroviruses; causes leukemia
in mice.
Noncanonical HUSH silencing
pathway: target silencing through
HUSH recruitment via DNA-binding
protein NP220/ZNF638 and potentially
other ZFPs.
Nuclear exosome targeting (NEXT)
complex: required for exosomal
degradation of many nuclear RNA
substrates, especially newly synthesized
RNA.
Pathogen-associated molecular
pattern (PAMP): small molecular
motifs conserved within a class of
microbes; recognized by host pattern
recognition receptors.
P-element-induced Wimpy testis
(PIWI)-interacting RNAs (piRNAs):
small noncoding RNAs that associate with
PIWI proteins to mediate transposon
silencing in a sequence-speciﬁc manner at
both post-transcriptional and
transcriptional levels; expressed
abundantly in germline cells.
Position-effect variegation: refers to
the differences in expression observed
when an identical gene is positioned at
different sites in the genome. The
expression level of such a gene can vary
widely depending on the speciﬁc site of
integration, usually with integration into
actively transcribed chromatin resulting
in strong expression, and integration into
repressive chromatin resulting in
transcriptional repression.
Processed pseudogenes:
nonfunctional copies of mRNAs that have
been reverse transcribed into DNA and
inserted into the genome using the
enzymatic activities of active L1 elements.

Trends in Genetics
OPEN ACCESS

invasion with reporter transgenes [15]. This led to the unexpected ﬁnding that, in addition to L1s,
HUSH is able to target a remarkably broad range of incoming DNAs for repression, independently
of whether and where they integrate in the genome, and importantly, even in the absence of previous exposure to such DNAs. The key features which confer susceptibility to HUSH are: (i) lack
of cellular introns, (ii) transgene length >1 kb (excluding ﬂuorescent marker), and (iii) high adenine
content in the sense strand (Figure 2A and Box 4). Given that the presence of cellular introns
protected transgenes against HUSH-mediated repression, we proposed that long, intronless
cDNA is the ‘pathogen-derived’ molecular ‘pattern’ recognized by the HUSH complex
(Figure 2B). A lack of introns is an intrinsic feature of retroelements, including retroviruses and L1
retrotransposons, which replicate via an RNA intermediate; that is, are reverse-transcribed to
cDNA, and integrate into the host genome. In contrast, most mammalian genes have a classical
exon–intron structure, with the average intron (6000 bp) around 40 times larger than the average
exon (150 bp) [16]. This recognition of long, intronless cDNA enables HUSH to promiscuously repress RNA-derived invading mobile elements while avoiding the inappropriate repression of introncontaining host genes. These ﬁndings revealed the existence of a genome surveillance system able
to distinguish ‘nonself’ from ‘self’ DNA, with important implications for genome regulation and
evolution.

Molecular basis for HUSH function
H3K9me3 ‘read & write’
The HUSH complex of TASOR, MPP8, and periphilin localizes to its target loci where it recruits
two effectors: SETDB1 promotes H3K9me3 deposition while MORC2 is an ATP-dependent
chromatin remodeler essential for transcriptional repression [7,8,12,17]. The molecular mechanism of HUSH function remains incompletely understood. HUSH has two main activities:
(i) coupling between ‘reading’ and ‘writing’ of H3K9me3 [7,11], and (ii) target transcript binding
[15,18]. An interaction between MPP8 and SETDB1 regulates both H3K9me3 ‘reading’ and ‘writing’ [7]. The MPP8 chromodomain binds both H3K9me3 [19] and methylated activating transcription factor 7 interacting protein (ATF7IP) [20], the nuclear chaperone of the SETDB1
methyltransferase [21,22]. By recognizing existing H3K9me3, MPP8 recruits ATF7IP-SETDB1
to the locus to promote further H3K9me3 deposition. However, this coupling between the
MPP8 ‘read’ and SETDB1 ‘write’ functions is insufﬁcient for repression, as TASOR, periphilin,

(A)

Retrocopies: collective term for copies
of mRNAs that have been reverse
transcribed into DNA and inserted into the
genome using the enzymatic activities of
active L1 elements; can be further divided
into protein-coding (retrogenes, proteincoding intronless genes) or nonfunctional
genes (processed pseudogenes).
Retroelements: a collective term for all
elements that are transcribed into RNA,
reverse-transcribed into DNA, and then
inserted into a new site in the genome;
they include retroviruses and lentiviruses,
retrotransposons, and host genes created
through integration of reverse-transcribed
host mRNA into the genome.
Retrotransposon: a transposon that
reverse transcribes its RNA genome and
integrates it into the host genome; it
requires a reverse transcriptase for its
replication.
RIG-1-like receptor: retinoic acidinducible gene-1-like receptor, a type of
intracellular pattern recognition receptor
involved in the recognition of viruses by the
innate immune system; binds to short
(<200 bp) single- or double-stranded
RNA.

(B)
HUSH
complex

TASOR

Periphilin

TASOR

Transcriptional
repression

MPP8

AAV
Unintegrated retrovirus

Episomal transgene

Protection from HUSH

X

Transcriptional repression

Periphilin
Binding

MPP8
No binding

Transcript
LINE-1 retrotransposon

Retrovirus

ZFP gene

Retrocopy

(3’ exon)

(intronless
gene copy)

Long exon

Transgenes
(intronless, adenine-rich,
>1.5kb)

L1 & transgene
+ intron

Intronless Intron-containing
Endogenous loci

Trends in Genetics

Figure 2. Human silencing hub (HUSH) targets a diverse set of elements for transcriptional repression through intron-dependent recognition. (A) HUSH
represses integrated long interspersed element-1 (L1) transposons, retroviruses, zinc ﬁnger protein (ZFP) genes, retrocopies, unusually long exons, and diverse long,
adenine-rich transgenes as well as episomal transgenes and – via a ‘noncanonical HUSH pathway’ – unintegrated retroviruses and adeno-associated viruses (AAVs).
(B) Intron insertion protects HUSH targets against repression (left). Periphilin speciﬁcally binds transcripts from intronless genomic loci (right). Abbreviations: MPP8,
M-phase phosphoprotein 8; TASOR, transcription activation suppressor.

Trends in Genetics, April 2023, Vol. 39, No. 4

255

Trends in Genetics
OPEN ACCESS

Box 4. HUSH–retroelement arms race
HUSH preferentially targets invading elements with high adenine (A) content in the sense strand [15]. Structurally poor, A-rich
RNAs were associated with enhanced viral cDNA synthesis [82], and many reverse-transcribing elements (including HIV and
L1 retrotransposon) have an unusual A-rich bias in the sense strand [55,83,84]. High adenine content may be inherently
connected with reverse transcription, and HUSH speciﬁcity for A-rich bias could therefore allow a more selective targeting
of retroviruses and retrotransposons for which reverse transcription is an integral part of their life cycle. Cellular mRNA from
host genes is also occasionally reverse transcribed to cDNA and integrated into a new genomic location via the activity of L1
proteins, creating intronless genomic loci (Box 5) [85], a subset of which are also HUSH-repressed. However, reverse transcription is not a natural part of the cellular mRNA life cycle, and sequences of host genes differ in their nucleotide composition in comparison to reverse-transcribed elements. This additional layer of HUSH speciﬁcity through recognition of A-rich
targets may thus represent a compromise between conﬂicting demands of silencing ‘nonself’ (invading DNAs) and tolerating
‘self’ (intronless genes) that is critical in limiting autoimmunity.
Long, intronless cDNA is an important intermediate of the retroelement life cycle, and is necessary for integration into the host
genome. Retroelements therefore have limited ability to bypass HUSH restriction. Similarly, if A-richness of the retroelement
genome is indeed important for efﬁcient reverse transcription, retroelements would have difﬁculty reducing the A-rich bias in
their genome to escape HUSH. Given that intron sequences, not splicing per se, protect against HUSH [15], retroelements
would need to maintain long, noncoding intron sequences in their genome, but are under selective pressure for a compact
genome. Complex, primate retroviruses, despite undergoing splicing, do not have noncoding intron sequences similar to
those present in host cellular genes, as their introns originate from overlapping open reading frames and are coding. Consequently, primate retroviruses are susceptible to HUSH restriction and encode Vpx/Vpr effectors to degrade HUSH
[66,86,87]. Endogenous retroelements do not encode auxiliary proteins and are unable to evade HUSH. In the ongoing evolutionary arms race, the recognition of long, intronless, A-rich cDNA by HUSH is thus, at present, a dead end for
retroelements.

and MPP8 protein domains with functions other than H3K9me3 binding are all essential for
HUSH-mediated silencing [14,23]. Furthermore, the ‘read–write’ mechanism is not absolutely essential for repression, as neither the MPP8 chromodomain nor ATF7IP methylation is required for
silencing. Indeed, an MPP8 chromodomain-deﬁcient mutant, which cannot bind H3K9me3, and
an ATF7IP methylation-site mutant, can both still repress their target [7,20,23]. Nevertheless, the
MPP8 chromodomain (and thus the ‘read–write’ mechanism) contributes to HUSH chromatin localization [7] and is required for stable HUSH occupancy at its target loci [23].
The role of periphilin and RNA binding in maintenance of HUSH repression
Periphilin is an RNA-binding protein that speciﬁcally binds transcripts from HUSH target loci [15]
and therefore makes a critical contribution to HUSH chromatin localization [7]. Periphilin binding
to its target RNA probably stabilizes HUSH at the target locus, independently of the binding of
the MPP8 chromodomain to H3K9me3 [7]. Supporting this, periphilin–RNA binding is also observed in SETDB1-deﬁcient cells, where no H3K9me3 is deposited at the target locus [15]. Moreover, increasing target transcription enhances HUSH binding [12], suggesting that RNA helps to
maintain HUSH at the locus. HUSH targets only transcribed loci [12,14], and target transcription
is required for the maintenance of H3K9me3 at the locus [15], most likely because RNA binding
by periphilin is required for H3K9me3 deposition. However, other reasons cannot be excluded
(e.g., a requirement for elongating RNA Pol II at the locus). Identifying a periphilin mutant deﬁcient
in RNA binding would thus allow testing whether periphilin RNA binding is essential to maintain
repression and facilitate the mechanistic interrogation of HUSH function. Although periphilin
does not appear to contain any classical RNA-recognition motifs, its N terminus is essential for
repression, mediates self-association, and was suggested to bind RNA [24]. Whether periphilin
self-association is facilitated by RNA binding or RNA binding and self-association represent independent functions requires further investigation.
Periphilin and RNA binding in target recognition and initiation of repression
Recognition of nascent transcripts is a key step in the initiation of HUSH repression. Incoming L1
fails to accumulate H3K9me3 if not transcribed [15], suggesting that target RNA is needed for the
256

Trends in Genetics, April 2023, Vol. 39, No. 4

Trends in Genetics
OPEN ACCESS

establishment of repression. Moreover, periphilin binds target RNA even in the absence of
H3K9me3 and detectable HUSH at the locus, supporting the model in which nascent RNA, via
periphilin, recruits HUSH to target loci [15] which subsequently recruits SETDB1 to initiate
H3K9me3 deposition [7]. Importantly, transcriptome-wide analysis of periphilin-bound RNAs revealed that periphilin binding to RNA is speciﬁc. Periphilin binds transcripts from L1s, KRAB–ZFP
genes and HUSH-sensitive loci, with a preference for full-length over truncated L1s as well as for
evolutionarily younger L1s [15]. The transcriptome-wide analysis also showed a remarkable
periphilin speciﬁcity towards transcripts derived from intronless genomic loci, that is, ‘self’
genes that resemble ‘nonself’ intronless invading elements and, in many cases, are products of
retrotransposition of cellular mRNA (Box 5). Periphilin–RNA binding therefore appears to specify
loci for repression and enables HUSH to discriminate intronless invading elements from introncontaining host genes (Figure 2B). The basis of such speciﬁcity remains unclear, also whether target recognition relies solely on periphilin–RNA recognition or whether an upstream event triggers
periphilin–RNA association (e.g., related to transcription kinetics or ﬂexibility of the nascent transcript). Notably, this RNA-mediated HUSH recruitment appears to be a common mode for many
HUSH targets (L1s, KRAB-ZFP genes, transgenes, cellular genes) (Figure 3).
An alternative means to recruit HUSH is through the sequence-speciﬁc DNA-binding protein
nuclear protein 220 (NP220) as illustrated for unintegrated murine leukemia virus (MLV) [25]
and recombinant adeno-associated virus (AAV) [26], that we refer to as the noncanonical

Box 5. Retrotransposition of cellular mRNAs by L1 creates new intronless genomic loci
L1s can also mediate retrotransposition of cellular mRNAs [85]. This occurs when L1 proteins (ORF1p and ORF2p) bind to
cellular rather than L1 mRNA. Because ORF1p binds RNA nonspeciﬁcally [88] and ORF2p binds the poly(A) tail of mRNA
[89], these L1 proteins can associate with any cellular polyadenylated transcript and mediate its reverse transcription and
integration into a new genomic location. Such gene duplication via an RNA intermediate has produced thousands of gene
copies in mammals [90,91]. In general, retrotransposition does not duplicate upstream regulatory sequences, and thus
retrocopies usually lack promoter sequences and were long regarded as ‘dead-on-arrival’ (nontranscribed and nonfunctional genes) [92]. However, large-scale studies revealed that transcribed retrocopies are widespread, with more than a
thousand retrocopies transcribed, many with intact coding sequence [65,93]. Indeed, there are at least 120 functional protein-coding retrocopies in our genome, with at least one functional retrocopy emerging every million years in the human
lineage over the past ~65 million years [64,65,94]. Overall, genes generated through retrotransposition can be classiﬁed
as processed pseudogenes (retrocopies with disrupted coding frames) and retrogenes (protein-coding retrocopies;
intronless genes).
To become functional, a newly retrotransposed gene needs to be expressed and thus needs to acquire a core promoter
along with other regulatory elements, such as enhancers. A straightforward way for a retrocopy to obtain transcription potential is to ‘hitch-hike’ on the regulatory elements of other genes [95]. Indeed, transcribed retrocopies are found close to
other genes, likely because open chromatin and/or regulatory elements of nearby genes facilitate retrocopy transcription
[90]. Many retrocopies are located within introns of transcribed host genes and are transcribed as fusion transcripts [65]. A
retrocopy may be inserted downstream of a pre-existing promoter or may acquire a new distant promoter, for example, by
the acquisition of a 5′ exon–intron structure from the vicinity of a retrogene insertion site [95,96]. Finally, a retrocopy may
also obtain a promoter from its parent gene if its transcript harbors a cryptic promoter or if the parental gene transcript
is transcribed from the transcription start site upstream of the canonical transcriptional start site [97].
What happens to transcribed, retrotransposed copies? Some evolve neutrally because they do not encode an entire protein, or encode an unnecessary protein, and thus eventually accumulate mutations and become pseudogenes. Other
retrocopies may encode a protein that is beneﬁcial to the organism, and become ﬁxed in the genome as retrogenes. Newly
emerged retrogenes sometimes evolve under positive selection to acquire a new function. This is possible because gene
duplication results in two copies of a gene: one can maintain its original function while the other acquires a new function.
For instance, new gene functions can arise through changes in the localization of encoded proteins in the cell [98,99] or
through acquisition of tissue-speciﬁc expression. Indeed, the majority of retrogenes are speciﬁcally expressed in the testis,
whereas their parental genes are ubiquitously expressed [64,65,91]. As a consequence, many retrogenes have evolved
new functions in the testes [64,90]. During primate evolution new retrogenes have been recruited to enhance male germline function and contributed signiﬁcantly to organismal evolution. The activity of L1 retrotransposons has therefore been a
driving force in genetic innovation during human evolution.

Trends in Genetics, April 2023, Vol. 39, No. 4

257

Trends in Genetics
OPEN ACCESS

RNA-mediated HUSH recruitment

DNA-mediated HUSH recruitment
‘Noncanonical HUSH pathway’

TASOR
Periphilin

Transcript

TASOR

MPP8

MPP8 CD
dispensable

Me Me
Me

L1 transposon
Retrovirus
Retrocopy
Transgene
ZFP gene

Periphilin

MPP8

NP220

MPP8 CD
required

Me Me
Me

Unintegrated retroviral DNA
AAV

Trends in Genetics

Figure 3. Two mechanisms of human silencing hub (HUSH) recruitment to the target loci. RNA-mediated HUSH
recruitment is a common recruitment mode for the majority of targets, but HUSH can also be recruited to a target locus via
DNA-binding protein nuclear protein 220 (NP220). Unlike RNA-mediated recruitment, the ‘noncanonical HUSH pathway’ requires
MPP8 chromodomain (CD) for repression. Abbreviations: AAV, adeno-associated virus; L1 transposon, long interspersed
element-1; Me, methyl; MPP8, M-phase phosphoprotein 8; TASOR, transcription activation suppressor; ZFP, zinc ﬁnger protein.

HUSH silencing pathway (Figure 3). Noncanonical HUSH-mediated silencing of unintegrated
MLV differs mechanistically from silencing of other targets, as it requires both the DNA-binding
activity of NP220 as well as a functional MPP8 chromodomain [25], a critical difference from L1
or transgene silencing [7,23]. Whether other DNA-binding proteins recruit HUSH through this
noncanonical pathway is unknown.
HUSH repression acts as a transcription-responsive rheostat
By binding its target RNA, HUSH can respond to increased transcription from its repressed locus if
H3K9me3 levels decline. This may occur during cell replication when unmodiﬁed, newly synthesized histones assemble on replicated chromatin, resulting in an approximate twofold dilution of
H3K9me3 levels and concomitant increase in transcription [27]. Transcription-induced recruitment
of HUSH to newly replicated chromatin would therefore enable inheritance of the repressed state
following DNA replication, consistent with transcription being required for the maintenance of
HUSH-mediated H3K9me3 at the target locus [15], and similar to transcription-coupled heterochromatin formation and propagation in ﬁssion yeast [28–30]. HUSH-mediated repression thus appears to function as an epigenetic rheostat: increased transcription from the target locus increases
the amount of target RNA, leading to further RNA binding by periphilin, increased occupancy of
HUSH components at the locus, SETDB1 and MORC2 recruitment, which in turn inhibits transcription. In this model, the maintenance of HUSH repression is mechanistically identical to de novo establishment: following each cell division, there is a re-establishment of repression driven by
increased target transcription, in a way similar to what happens when a transcribed target is encountered by the cell for the very ﬁrst time. This continual sensing of transcription and target
RNA explains how HUSH represses L1s in euchromatic environments, often within introns of actively transcribed genes, and why L1 ‘fossils’ (i.e., evolutionarily old L1s, which have lost transcriptional potential) are ignored by HUSH and are no longer H3K9me3-modiﬁed [12–14].
258

Trends in Genetics, April 2023, Vol. 39, No. 4

Trends in Genetics
OPEN ACCESS

Intron-mediated protection against HUSH
Introns protect against HUSH repression [15]. Surprisingly, this protection is independent of intron
splicing or spliceosome recruitment to the transcript, as shown by unspliced, mutant introns still
protecting transgenes against HUSH, and effectively spliced nonintronic sequences being unable
to counteract HUSH [15]. How introns protect against HUSH must thus relate to some intrinsic properties of introns. Given the complex network of RNA-binding proteins involved in exon–intron recognition [31], intronic sequences may counteract HUSH by recruiting proteins(s) that actively prevent
periphilin binding to the transcript, a mechanism consistent with the observation that intron insertion
into HUSH-sensitive transgene partially decreases periphilin binding to the reporter transcript [15]. An
alternative mechanism of protection may be through intronic sequences modulating RNA polymerase elongation rates: intronic regions show decreased nucleosome occupancy as compared to
exons [32–34], a feature correlating with faster elongation rates [32,33,35]. Slow elongation through
long exons may trigger HUSH recruitment and be counteracted by the decreased nucleosome density and increased elongation over introns, a mechanism consistent with HUSH-mediated deposition
of H3K9me3 over unusually long exons [14,15]. Understanding how introns protect against HUSH
repression is an important outstanding question and is likely to provide a crucial insight into what triggers HUSH recruitment to the target locus.
The molecular mechanism underlying HUSH repression
Transcription-induced HUSH recruitment leads to H3K9me3 deposition at the target loci. In previous
models, H3K9me3 deposition, together with MORC2-dependent compaction, were considered the
HUSH effector functions required for repression. Moreover, DNA methylation could also contribute to
the HUSH-mediated repression as MPP8 was shown to recruit DNA methyltransferase 3A
(DNMT3A) to HUSH target loci [19,36]. However, recent work has shown that HUSH-mediated L1
repression can be maintained even in the absence of H3K9me3 and DNA methylation at the locus
[23]. In mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs), where HUSH is critical for repression of endogenous L1 loci in the absence of DNA methylation, chromodomain-deﬁcient MPP8 maintains L1 repression, despite its inability to bind SETDB1 and promote H3K9me3 deposition. This implies that,
with the help of MORC2 to compact chromatin, HUSH represses target expression directly, or
uses a different effector function.
The RNA degradation machinery nuclear exosome targeting (NEXT) complex cooperates with
HUSH to restrict transposon expression [37], suggesting that HUSH-mediated repression also involves post-transcriptional RNA degradation. NEXT is composed of zinc ﬁnger CCHC-type containing 8 (ZCCHC8), RNA-binding protein 7 (RBM7), and RNA helicase MTR4 (MTREX), and is recruited
to HUSH-repressed transposon loci through the high-afﬁnity interaction between MPP8 and
ZCCHC8, where it guides exonucleolytic decay of prematurely terminated, nonpolyadenylated transcripts [37]. However, in contrast to NEXT, HUSH limits full-length, polyadenylated transposon transcripts [37]. HUSH and NEXT are thus independent but connected pathways acting on the same
transposon loci: HUSH is responsible for transcriptional silencing, and NEXT clears residual, nonfunctional transcripts from chromatin, produced as a consequence of the repressive environment created
by HUSH. Such a collaboration between transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms is a
common theme, as illustrated by the cooperation of RNA-induced transcriptional silencing (RITS)
and Mtl1-Red1 core (MTREC) complexes in ﬁssion yeast [38,39] and rixosome with RITS (in ﬁssion
yeast) or Polycomb (in human cells) [40,41]. Similarly, HUSH cooperates with the CNOT1 RNA degradation pathway to repress latent HIV-1 [18]. These two pathways also work independently, as
CNOT1 depletion in HUSH-deﬁcient cells further increases HIV-1 de-repression [18].
Whilst HUSH recruits NEXT to transposon loci, how much NEXT contributes to the overall HUSHmediated repression is unclear. MPP8 mutants unable to bind ZCCHC8 but retaining HUSH

Trends in Genetics, April 2023, Vol. 39, No. 4

259

Trends in Genetics
OPEN ACCESS

function would allow testing the contribution of NEXT to transposon repression. Similar separation of function will help probe the basis of HUSH repression. As discussed earlier,
chromodomain-deﬁcient MPP8 maintains repression but does not promote H3K9me3 as it cannot bind SETDB1 [23]. This mutant allows the testing of how HUSH itself affects transcription and
RNA stability without the additional effects of H3K9me3. Understanding the molecular mechanism underlying HUSH repression is an important outstanding question.
If H3K9me3 is not absolutely required for repression, what is the function of H3K9me3 at the
locus? H3K9me3 is likely to enhance the afﬁnity of HUSH for chromatin and reinforce repression.
Multivalent binding to H3K9me3 and the target transcript could accelerate the association of
HUSH with chromatin and stably anchor HUSH at the locus. Furthermore, by decreasing the
Pol II elongation rate over the HUSH target [12,42], H3K9me3 will retain the nascent transcript
on chromatin and facilitate HUSH–RNA binding. HUSH targets include L1s, as well as gene family
clusters such as rapidly evolving KRAB-ZFP genes and duplicated genes/pseudogenes, all of
which are prone to ectopic recombination due to their highly homologous sequences.
H3K9me3 may therefore protect HUSH-repressed transposons and genes from illegitimate recombination [43] and help to maintain genome integrity.

The role of HUSH-mediated repression
The physiological signiﬁcance of HUSH function
All three HUSH proteins as well as SETDB1 are essential during development. TASOR-deﬁcient
mice are embryonically lethal before completion of gastrulation [44]. Periphilin homozygous
deﬁciency is lethal early in embryogenesis, and heterozygous deﬁciency is compensated by the
increase in expression from the wild-type allele [45]. SETDB1 is required for germline development [46], and both SETDB1 and MPP8 are essential for mouse ESCs' pluripotency and selfrenewal [46–48], with SETDB1 knockout being lethal at the peri-implantation stage at 3.5 days
post coitum [49]. MPP8 knockout is also not well tolerated, though the severity of the phenotype
remains unclear. The Xu laboratory showed that MPP8-homozygous knockout mice are viable
but born at a lower ratio and with signiﬁcantly reduced body size and weight [50], whilst the
Penninger laboratory reported that MPP8 knockout is embryonically lethal before embryonic
day 11.5 [51]. Such severe phenotypes of HUSH/SETDB1 deﬁciency highlight an important
physiological role for HUSH. This seems particularly critical during early development, as despite
being constitutively expressed in all tissues [52], HUSH deﬁciency does not usually affect proliferation of differentiated cells [23], and HUSH components are not essential [53].
The control of L1 elements and widespread changes on gene expression
Phenotypes of HUSH deﬁciency are likely related to the role of HUSH in controlling the expression
of L1 transposons. HUSH selectively targets full-length, transcriptionally active L1s usually derived from evolutionarily young families, including human-speciﬁc L1s (L1Hs) [12,13], the only
retrotransposition-competent L1s [54]. These are exactly the elements that pose the highest
threat to genome integrity, and their transcriptional repression by HUSH restricts their mobilization. Moreover, HUSH-occupied L1s are frequently located within the introns of actively transcribed genes, and H3K9me3 deposition over L1 sequences leads to transcriptional
attenuation of host gene expression [12,55] through decreased RNA Pol II elongation [42].
Although these effects are subtle, they are likely to be widespread, as 79% of human genes
are estimated to contain at least one segment of L1 elements in their transcription unit [55].
Safeguarding against interferon activation and suppression of the immune response
In addition to the general impact on host transcriptome, HUSH-mediated L1 repression safeguards against the activation of interferons and inﬂammatory genes [56]. HUSH depletion in
260

Trends in Genetics, April 2023, Vol. 39, No. 4

Trends in Genetics
OPEN ACCESS

human cell lines and primary ﬁbroblasts induces interferon-stimulated genes, an effect dependent
on the expression of L1s, which can generate double-stranded RNAs that are sensed by cytoplasmic RIG-1-like receptors [56]. Given that many cancers show decreased MPP8 expression
and are also characterized by a common dominant interferon signature [56], targeting the HUSH
complex may represent a new therapeutic avenue in cancer immunotherapy. Interfering with
HUSH expression may also make cancers more immunogenic through the release of L1 RNA
to induce interferons and increase antitumor immunity. Indeed, a recent clustered regularly
interspaced short palindromic repeats/CRISPR-associated protein 9 (CRISPR/Cas9) screen revealed that HUSH-mediated L1 silencing is a selective dependency of acute myeloid leukemia
(AML), critical for both AML initiation and progression [50]. While HUSH is dispensable for normal
hematopoiesis, all HUSH members – as well as MORC2, SETDB1, and ATF7IP – impair AML proliferation, and HUSH-deﬁcient AML cells fail to develop leukemia upon transplantation into immunodeﬁcient mice. Rather than related to interferon induction, this effect was attributed to L1induced DNA damage [50]. Both L1 activation and MPP8 deﬁciency results in DNA damage in
AML, and blocking retrotransposition with reverse transcriptase inhibitor abrogates both DNA
damage and growth defects of MPP8-deﬁcient cells [50]. HUSH and SETDB1 were also hits in
an in vivo screen for factors contributing to cancer resistance to immunotherapy [57]. HUSH
and SETDB1 loss sensitized solid tumors to immune checkpoint blockade (ICB). Whilst the
HUSH effect was context-speciﬁc, and the exact mechanism was not studied in detail,
SETDB1 loss activated transposons and immune gene clusters and led to a T cell antitumor response through the recognition of transposon-encoded antigens [57]. Collectively, these studies
identify HUSH and SETDB1 as tumor suppressors and could lead to the development of novel
epigenetic therapies that selectively enhance antitumor immunity.
Innate immunity against incoming DNAs
HUSH function extends well beyond controlling the expression of integrated retroviruses and
retrotransposons. Experiments mimicking genome invasion with artiﬁcial cDNA transgenes revealed the ability of HUSH to target a vast range of invading genetic elements, independent of
whether, where, and how they integrate into the genome [15]. By targeting long, intronless
cDNA, HUSH distinguishes genome-invading intronless DNA from intron-containing genomic
DNA, even in the absence of prior exposure to the invading element. This ability to distinguish
self from nonself without prior exposure to the speciﬁc antigen is the outstanding feature of the
innate immune system and is achieved through the recognition of conserved molecular patterns,
maintained by invading pathogens but absent from their host. Consequently, HUSH is a novel
component of the innate immune system and long, intronless cDNA is a pathogenassociated molecular pattern (PAMP) (Table 1). Intronless cDNA is the consequence of reverse transcription. By targeting cDNA for repression, HUSH controls the reverse ﬂow of genetic
information from RNA to DNA within the genome (Figure 4, Key ﬁgure). Similar to other receptors
of the innate immune system, HUSH is constitutively expressed across diverse cell types and thus
provides a universal, cell-autonomous genome surveillance system (Table 1).
What is the relationship between the HUSH pathway and other silencing systems such as KRABZFPs, DNA methylation, and the P-element-induced Wimpy testis (PIWI)-interacting RNA
(piRNA) pathway? Do these pathways play redundant roles at the cellular and organismal
level, or is there a clear division of labor between them? HUSH is constitutively expressed across
diverse somatic cell types as well as pluripotent and germ cells. In contrast, KRAB-ZFPs show
high tissue and cell-type speciﬁcity, and the expression of mammalian piRNA proteins is predominantly restricted to germline and gonadal tissues [58,59]. Therefore, whilst HUSH and DNA methylation are predicted to control mobile DNAs throughout the body, the piRNA pathway and
KRAB-ZFPs have more specialized roles. Importantly, HUSH does not rely on the memory of

Trends in Genetics, April 2023, Vol. 39, No. 4

261

Trends in Genetics
OPEN ACCESS

Table 1. Conceptual similarities between the HUSH pathway and the innate immune system
Innate immune system

HUSH complex

Refs

Recognizes a conserved pathogen-associated
molecular pattern (PAMP): present in pathogens
but absent from host; pathogens rely on PAMPs
for their survival and/or virulence and thus have
limited ability to mutate them

A long, intronless cDNA is a molecular feature
recognized by HUSH; this is characteristic of
retroelements, mobile DNAs which replicate
through an RNA intermediate, reverse transcribe
their RNA genome, and integrate into the host
genome. Infrequent in the host as mammalian
genes have classical intron–exon structure;
intronless cDNA is an important intermediate of
the retroelement life cycle, necessary for
integration to the host genome (Box 4)

[15]

Provides immediate protection against the
invader, no requirement for memory

Recognizes a broad range of diverse elements,
even in the absence of previous exposure

[15]

Does not confer long-lasting immunity, and is
followed by a potentially more effective adaptive
response

Provides only short-term repression over
evolutionary timescales as it selectively targets
evolutionarily young L1s which retain
transcriptional activity
HUSH-mediated repression limits the expression
of mobile DNA, but does not completely prevent it;
piRNA pathway and KRAB-ZFPs step in with time
and provide lasting and more effective adaptive
response?

[12,13]

Unlike components of adaptive immunity which
are expressed in specialized cells, innate immune
receptors are expressed in almost all cells

HUSH is expressed in almost all cell types, whilst
KRAB-ZFPs display tissue-speciﬁc expression and
piRNAs/PIWI proteins are exclusively expressed in
germline

[67–70]

previous invasions to recognize its target, and provides immediate protection against ‘nonself’
DNA (Table 1) [15]. However, as HUSH selectively silences only evolutionarily young L1s
[12,13], it does not confer long-lasting silencing across evolutionary timescales. In contrast, the
piRNA and KRAB-ZFPs pathways cannot provide immediate defense against new mobile
DNAs, but once established they maintain long-term memory to neutralize any similar future
threat. By targeting newly-integrated, transcriptionally active genomic invaders for repression,
HUSH may buffer any immediate, potentially deleterious effects on cellular ﬁtness and provide a
window of opportunity to establish sequence-speciﬁc, adaptive repression by KRAB-ZFPs and
piRNA pathways. Over time, silencing by KRAB-ZFPs may replace HUSH-mediated repression,
ultimately leading to the acquisition of invading DNAs by the host genome.
Only genome invasion of the germline and during embryogenesis can be transmitted to subsequent generations and maintained in the population. Early upon fertilization and during germcell speciﬁcation, the genome undergoes two distinct waves of DNA demethylation and is exposed to detrimental effects of reactivated transposons [60–62]. HUSH is essential for the survival
of cells that have low levels of DNA methylation, suggesting that HUSH compensates for the DNA
methylation loss upon fertilization to ensure continuous silencing of L1s [23]. Similarly, HUSH may
cooperate with the piRNA pathway in transposon silencing during germ-cell speciﬁcation. Investigating how different genome defense pathways interact to initiate and maintain silencing of invading DNAs during development, and how these pathways cooperate to allow domestication
of these elements, are important areas of future research.
Targeting intronless genomic loci and long exons
Recognition of long, intronless DNA enables HUSH to target sequence-diverse ‘nonself’ invading
DNAs. However, this molecular pattern is also found within ‘self’ DNA, as 3% of the human
262

Trends in Genetics, April 2023, Vol. 39, No. 4

Trends in Genetics
OPEN ACCESS

Key figure

Human silencing hub (HUSH) targets products of reverse transcription for repression and controls
the reverse ﬂow of genetic information within the genome
Host genes

Retroelements
RNA
Genome

mRNA
DNA to RNA

Exon

RNA

RNA
Intron

Intron-containing gene

Reverse transcription
DNA genome

RNA to DNA

Viral DNA

No repression

Retrotransposon with cellular mRNA

Retrotransposon
RNA

Retrovirus

mRNA

RNA

DNA to RNA

RNA

RNA to DNA

DNA to RNA

New LINE-1 insertion

LINE-1

Host gene

RNA
RNA to DNA
Intronless gene copy

TASOR
Periphilin

MPP8

Control of the
(from RNA to DNA) within the genome
Trends in Genetics

Figure 4. Mammalian genes have an intron–exon structure and undergo splicing during DNA-to-RNA transcription. Retroelements replicate through an RNA intermediate
and are reverse transcribed to DNA and integrate into the host genome. Recognition of intronless complementary DNA (cDNA), a product of reverse transcription, allows
HUSH to control the reverse genetic ﬂow within the host genome. Abbreviations: LINE-1, long interspersed element-1; MPP8, M-phase phosphoprotein 8; TASOR,
transcription activation suppressor.

genome is intronless. Consistently, a subset of intronless genomic loci show HUSH occupancy,
HUSH-mediated H3K9me3 deposition, and periphilin binding to their RNAs [15] (Box 6). In contrast,
the majority of intron-containing genes (without intronic L1 insertions) are not susceptible to HUSH.
The main exceptions are genes with unusually long exons, as HUSH treats these very long exons
in a similar manner to intronless genes [14,15]. The average exon length in the human genome is
~150 bp, but many genes have single long exons (>1.5 kb). For instance, ZFP domains within
KRAB-ZFPs are encoded by a single long 3′ exon (average length ~4.5 kb) and coding sequences
of some protocadherin genes are within a single large exon (average length >2.5 kb) [63]. HUSH is
recruited to such transcribed exons of KRAB-ZFPs, protocadherins, and other genes (e.g., BRCA2,
MUC16) where it promotes H3K9me3 deposition [7,14,15,51]. This targeting of long exons, whose
molecular features clearly resemble intronless cDNAs, shows that any deviation from a classical
exon–intron architecture can initiate HUSH recruitment. It can also have signiﬁcant cellular and physiological consequences as illustrated by HUSH-mediated repression of protocadherin genes being
important for brain development and neuronal individuality [51].
The emergence of new genes
The ability of HUSH to recognize sequence-diverse genetic elements is essential as it enables
HUSH to target retrotransposed cellular mRNAs (intronless retrocopies and processed
pseudogenes) for transcriptional repression. This capability appears to be unique: no other
mammalian transposon silencing pathway targets such products of reverse transcription.
Retrotransposition of cellular mRNA creates new intronless genomic loci and represents a
major route for the formation of new genes (Box 5) [64]. HUSH-mediated repression therefore

Trends in Genetics, April 2023, Vol. 39, No. 4

263

Trends in Genetics
OPEN ACCESS

Box 6. Selective repression of intronless loci by HUSH
As a result of recognition of long, intronless cDNA, HUSH targets intronless genomic loci within the host genome. However,
HUSH-repressed intronless loci account for a small fraction of all intronless loci. This raises the question of why only some
intronless loci are repressed by HUSH. Many are simply nontranscribed and therefore not targeted by HUSH. However, there
are still many transcribed intronless loci that do not show HUSH-mediated H3K9me3. HUSH may preferentially target
intronless genomic loci with high adenine content and length >1.5 kb, as seen for transgenes [15], and only the most evolutionarily young loci, as seen for L1s [12,13]. Some HUSH-repressed intronless loci are indeed derived from recent transposition events: UTP14C, a copy of X-linked gene UTP14A, is a primate-speciﬁc retrogene repressed by HUSH [100,101], as is
the RBMXL1 gene that likely arose prior to divergence of the human and primate lineage [102]. Interestingly, many intronless
loci without HUSH-mediated H3K9me3 still show periphilin binding to their transcripts. This observation suggests that
periphilin may sample transcripts from many loci, of which relatively few are eventually modiﬁed by H3K9me3, because either
periphilin binding to target RNA is insufﬁcient for H3K9me3 deposition, or an active mechanism prevents H3K9me3 deposition over some genes. Investigating HUSH-repressed intronless loci in more detail may not only help determine the basis for
selective repression of these targets but may also reveal important mechanistic insight into HUSH function.

has important implications for the genesis of new genes and their functional evolution. A newly integrated transcribed retrocopy may be detrimental to the host if it affects host gene expression.
For instance, an inserted retrocopy may interfere with splicing and/or polyadenylation, and
retrocopies carrying their own promoters can also affect the transcriptional machinery of the
host gene [65]. In addition, while the retrocopy might confer a selective advantage (e.g., to
germ cells), the increased gene dose may be deleterious for other cell types. Therefore, natural
selection often acts against transcriptionally active retrocopy insertions [65]. By repressing such
retrocopies, HUSH counteracts potentially negative effects on host gene transcription and cellular
ﬁtness, and facilitates their acquisition by the host genome.
Practical implications of promiscuous transgene repression by HUSH
The ability of HUSH to repress a diverse range of DNAs has practical implications, being highly
relevant for any molecular biology experiment that involves transgene expression, including
gene editing by CRISPR/Cas9, as well as gene therapy. HUSH-mediated silencing signiﬁcantly
restricts expression from different integrated transgenes, including lentiviral and nonviral, as
well as from transfected plasmids and AAV vectors [15,26,66]. As HUSH is constitutively
expressed in the majority of cell types, transgene repression by HUSH is not restricted to any speciﬁc cell line. Thus, inefﬁcient transgene expression resulting from HUSH-mediated repression
likely represents a universal problem. Over the past decades, considerable efforts have been
made to improve transgene expression, in particular from lentiviral vectors that provide a versatile
means for ex vivo and in vivo gene transfer into dividing and nondividing cells. The realization that
HUSH repression is an important bottleneck to achieve high gene expression will enable improved transgene optimization strategies. Similarly, as Cas9 expression from lentiviral transgenes
is markedly HUSH-restricted [15], HUSH-mediated repression is relevant for efﬁcient CRISPR/
Cas9 gene editing and CRISPR-mediated control of gene expression (CRISPR interference or
activation). For applications where Cas9 expression is a limiting factor for successful gene editing,
transient HUSH complex inhibition may be essential to achieve the desired outcome. Finally,
HUSH repression of transfected transgenes means that HUSH is likely to limit the efﬁciency of lentiviral particle production. Low expression from the lentiviral transfer vector will result in decreased
viral titers. HUSH-deﬁcient cells may therefore enhance expression and packaging of large lentiviral constructs in applications where a high lentiviral titer is required. Further work will fully characterize the importance of HUSH repression in such practical applications.

Concluding remarks and future perspectives
Despite only 7 years since the discovery of the HUSH complex, HUSH has emerged as a critical
player in genome defense, with far-reaching implications for genome evolution and function. The
264

Trends in Genetics, April 2023, Vol. 39, No. 4

Outstanding questions
What is the trigger for HUSH recruitment to the target loci? Is periphilin–
RNA binding the only source of speciﬁcity? How does canonical HUSH
function differ from noncanonical
(NP220-mediated)?
What is the function of TASOR and its
protein domains that are critical for repression: poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) and Spen paralog and
ortholog C-terminal domain (SPOC)?
Is RNA–periphilin binding required to
maintain repression? Which domain
mediates RNA binding?
What is the mechanism by which
HUSH silences transcription? How
does H3K9me3 affect transcription
over HUSH targets? What is the function of H3K9me3?
Introns protect against HUSH repression, but neither splicing nor
spliceosome recruitment is required.
How does normal intron–exon structure
protect against HUSH repression?
What is the role of HUSH during early
development and germline speciﬁcation? What is the basis for embryonic
lethality of the HUSH complex deﬁciency? Is it through failure to compensate for DNA methylation loss upon
fertilization?
What is the relationship between
HUSH-mediated silencing and other
epigenetic silencing pathways?
How does HUSH-mediated repression
affect genome evolution and function?
Does HUSH function impose any constraints on mammalian and retroviral
genomes? How has this shaped retroviral evolution?
Can HUSH inhibition be harnessed for
therapeutic applications (e.g., gene
therapy, cancer therapy, anti-HIV-1
therapy)?

Trends in Genetics
OPEN ACCESS

basic operating principles of this RNA-mediated transcriptional silencing system have now been
deﬁned, along with a set of targeted genetic elements (Figure 2A) and rules that underlie their selection. However, our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying HUSH repression
and speciﬁcity, as well as the exact function of HUSH components and their protein domains,
remains incomplete (see Outstanding questions). Advances in cryoelectron microscopy and
in silico protein structure predictions will facilitate detailed structural interrogation of the HUSH
complex, while identiﬁcation of mutants deﬁcient in key activities such as RNA binding is likely
to provide important insights into mechanisms of repression. Given that HUSH recruitment to
the target transcript is likely to be tightly intertwined with transcription kinetics and nascent
RNA dynamics, advances in genomic tools and the ability to track transcriptional activity and nascent RNA in live cells with single-molecule microscopy should help explain how HUSH is recruited to its target loci. Similarly, such tools will also determine the exact contribution of HUSH
and H3K9me3 to transcriptional repression.
Beyond a mechanistic understanding of HUSH function is a requirement to understand how
HUSH contributes to mammalian genome evolution (see Outstanding questions). While somatic
HUSH function is likely to play a key role in domestication of mobile elements (e.g., by offsetting
potential negative effects of newly emerged genes and transposons), it will be critical to establish
the importance of HUSH function during early development and germline speciﬁcation, stages
that support inheritance of newly integrated genetic elements. Understanding the relationship between HUSH and other silencing systems that are active during these stages (e.g., the piRNA
pathway) is therefore essential. Harnessing functional genetics approaches to mimic genome invasion by mobile DNAs in both mouse model systems and in vitro cellular models of early embryo
and germline will allow testing of how different pathways respond to mobile DNAs, and will ultimately help us to understand how these elements become domesticated. Investigating the intricate relationship between nonself genetic elements and the host pathways controlling them will
help to unveil mechanisms that shape human genome evolution.
Finally, future research should also characterize the importance of HUSH repression in practical applications (i.e., enhancing gene therapy) and investigate the potential of therapeutically targeting the
complex for novel immuno-oncology treatments as well as latency reversal in HIV-1 infection.
Acknowledgments
We thank all members of the Lehner laboratory for helpful discussions. This work was supported by the Wellcome Trust
Principal Research Fellowship to P.J.L. (210688/Z/18/Z). M.S. was supported by a Boehringer Ingelheim Fonds PhD
fellowship (2018–2020). The work was further supported by the NIHR Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre.

Declaration of interests
No interests are declared.

References
1. Schlee, M. and Hartmann, G. (2016) Discriminating self from
non-self in nucleic acid sensing. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 16,
566–580
2. de Oliveira, Mann C.C. and Hornung, V. (2021) Molecular
mechanisms of nonself nucleic acid recognition by the innate
immune system. Eur. J. Immunol. 51, 1897–1910
3. Chuong, E.B. et al. (2017) Regulatory activities of transposable
elements: from conﬂicts to beneﬁts. Nat. Rev. Genet. 18, 71–86
4. Fueyo, R. et al. (2022) Roles of transposable elements in the
regulation of mammalian transcription. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.
23, 481–497
5. Almeida, M.V. et al. (2022) Taming transposable elements in
vertebrates: from epigenetic silencing to domestication. Trends
Genet. 38, 529–553

6. Cordaux, R. and Batzer, M.A. (2009) The impact of
retrotransposons on human genome evolution. Nat. Rev.
Genet. 10, 691–703
7. Tchasovnikarova, I.A. et al. (2015) Epigenetic silencing by the
HUSH complex mediates position-effect variegation in human
cells. Science 348, 1481–1485
8. Tchasovnikarova, I.A. et al. (2017) Hyperactivation of HUSH
complex function by Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease mutation
in MORC2. Nat. Genet. 49, 1035–1044
9. Liu, L. et al. (2011) A whole genome screen for HIV restriction
factors. Retrovirology 8, 94
10. Chougui, G. and Margottin-Goguet, F. (2019) HUSH, a link
between intrinsic immunity and HIV latency. Front. Microbiol.
10, 224

Trends in Genetics, April 2023, Vol. 39, No. 4

265

Trends in Genetics
OPEN ACCESS

11. Timms, R.T. et al. (2016) Position-effect variegation revisited:
HUSHing up heterochromatin in human cells. BioEssays 38,
333–343
12. Liu, N. et al. (2018) Selective silencing of euchromatic L1s revealed by genome-wide screens for L1 regulators. Nature
553, 228–232
13. Robbez-Masson, L. et al. (2018) The HUSH complex cooperates with TRIM28 to repress young retrotransposons and new
genes. Genome Res. 28, 836–845
14. Douse, C.H. et al. (2020) TASOR is a pseudo-PARP that directs
HUSH complex assembly and epigenetic transposon control.
Nat. Commun. 11, 4940
15. Seczynska, M. et al. (2021) Genome surveillance by HUSHmediated silencing of intronless mobile elements. Nature 601,
440–445
16. Piovesan, A. et al. (2016) GeneBase 1.1: a tool to summarize
data from NCBI gene datasets and its application to an update
of human gene statistics. Database 2016, baw153
17. Douse, C.H. et al. (2018) Neuropathic MORC2 mutations
perturb GHKL ATPase dimerization dynamics and epigenetic silencing by multiple structural mechanisms. Nat.
Commun. 9, 651
18. Matkovic, R. et al. (2022) TASOR epigenetic repressor cooperates with a CNOT1 RNA degradation pathway to repress HIV.
Nat. Commun. 13, 1–17
19. Kokura, K. et al. (2010) Methyl-H3K9-binding protein MPP8
mediates E-cadherin gene silencing and promotes tumour cell
motility and invasion. EMBO J. 29, 3673–3687
20. Tsusaka, T. et al. (2018) Tri-methylation of ATF7IP by G9a/GLP
recruits the chromodomain protein. Epigenetics Chromatin 11, 56
21. Timms, R.T. et al. (2016) ATF7IP-mediated stabilization of the
histone methyltransferase SETDB1 is essential for heterochromatin formation by the HUSH complex. Cell Rep. 17, 653–659
22. Tsusaka, T. et al. (2019) ATF7IP regulates SETDB1 nuclear localization and increases its ubiquitination. EMBO Rep. 20, e48297
23. Müller, I. et al. (2021) MPP8 is essential for sustaining self-renewal of
ground-state pluripotent stem cells. Nat. Commun. 12, 1–17
24. Prigozhin, D.M. et al. (2020) Periphilin self-association underpins epigenetic silencing by the HUSH complex. Nucleic Acids
Res. 48, 10313–10328
25. Zhu, Y. et al. (2018) NP220 mediates silencing of unintegrated
retroviral DNA. Nature 564, 278–282
26. Das, A. et al. (2022) Epigenetic silencing of recombinant adenoassociated virus genomes by NP220 and the HUSH complex.
J. Virol. 96, e0203921
27. Alabert, C. et al. (2015) Two distinct modes for propagation of
histone PTMs across the cell cycle. Genes Dev. 29, 585–590
28. Bühler, M. (2009) RNA turnover and chromatin-dependent
gene silencing. Chromosoma 118, 141–151
29. Moazed, D. (2011) Mechanisms for the inheritance of chromatin
states. Cell 146, 510–518
30. Kloc, A. et al. (2008) RNA interference guides histone modiﬁcation during the s phase of chromosomal replication. Curr. Biol.
18, 490–495
31. Busch, A. and Hertel, K.J. (2012) Evolution of SR protein and hnRNP
splicing regulatory factors. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. RNA 3, 1–12
32. Schwartz, S. et al. (2009) Chromatin organization marks exon–
intron structure. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 16, 990–995
33. Tilgner, H. et al. (2009) Nucleosome positioning as a determinant of exon recognition. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 16, 996–1001
34. Andersson, R. et al. (2009) Nucleosomes are well positioned in
exons and carry characteristic histone modiﬁcations. Genome
Res. 19, 1732–1741
35. Veloso, A. et al. (2014) Rate of elongation by RNA polymerase II
is associated with speciﬁc gene features and epigenetic modiﬁcations. Genome Res. 24, 896–905
36. Chang, Y. et al. (2011) MPP8 mediates the interactions between DNA methyltransferase Dnmt3a and H3K9 methyltransferase GLP/G9a. Nat. Commun. 2, 533
37. Garland, W. et al. (2022) Chromatin modiﬁer HUSH cooperates with RNA decay factor NEXT to restrict transposable
element expression. Mol. Cell 82, 1691–1707.e8
38. Zofall, M. et al. (2012) RNA elimination machinery targeting meiotic mRNAs promotes facultative heterochromatin formation.
Science 335, 96–100

266

Trends in Genetics, April 2023, Vol. 39, No. 4

39. Lee, N.N. et al. (2013) Mtr4-like protein coordinates nuclear
RNA processing for heterochromatin assembly and for telomere maintenance. Cell 155, 1061–1074
40. Shipkovenska, G. et al. (2020) A conserved RNA degradation
complex required for spreading and epigenetic inheritance of
heterochromatin. eLife 9, 1–25
41. Zhou, H. et al. (2022) Rixosomal RNA degradation contributes
to silencing of Polycomb target genes. Nature 604, 167–174
42. Saint-André, V. et al. (2011) Histone H3 lysine 9 trimethylation
and HP1γ favor inclusion of alternative exons. Nat. Struct.
Mol. Biol. 18, 337–344
43. Becker, J.S. et al. (2016) H3K9me3-dependent heterochromatin: barrier to cell fate changes. Trends Genet. 32, 29
44. Harten, S.K. et al. (2014) The ﬁrst mouse mutants of D14Abb1e
(Fam208a) show that it is critical for early development. Mamm.
Genome 25, 293–303
45. Soehn, A.S. et al. (2009) Periphilin is strongly expressed in the
murine nervous system and is indispensable for murine development. Genesis 47, 697–707
46. Liu, S. et al. (2014) Setdb1 is required for germline development
and silencing of H3K9me3-marked endogenous retroviruses in
primordial germ cells. Genes Dev. 28, 2041–2055
47. Bilodeau, S. et al. (2009) SetDB1 contributes to repression of
genes encoding developmental regulators and maintenance of
ES cell state. Genes Dev. 23, 2484–2489
48. Muller, H.J. (1930) Types of visible variations induced by X-rays
in Drosophila. J. Genet. 22, 299–334
49. Dodge, J.E. et al. (2004) Histone H3-K9 methyltransferase
ESET is essential for early development. Mol. Cell. Biol. 24,
2478–2486
50. Gu, Z. et al. (2021) Silencing of LINE-1 retrotransposons is a selective
dependency of myeloid leukemia. Nat. Genet. 53, 672–682
51. Hagelkruys, A. et al. (2022) The HUSH complex controls brain
architecture and protocadherin ﬁdelity. Sci. Adv. 8, 7247
52. Uhlén, M. et al. (2015) Tissue-based map of the human
proteome. Science 347, 126049
53. Dempster, J.M. et al. (2019) Extracting biological insights from
the pro ject Achilles genome-scale CRISPR screens in cancer
cell lines. bioRxiv Published online July 31, 2019. https://doi.
org/10.1101/720243
54. Brouha, B. et al. (2003) Hot L1s account for the bulk of
retrotransposition in the human population. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 100, 5280–5285
55. Han, J.S. et al. (2004) Transcriptional disruption by the L1
retrotransposon and implications for mammalian transcriptomes.
Nature 429, 268–274
56. Tunbak, H. et al. (2020) The HUSH complex is a gatekeeper of
type I interferon through epigenetic regulation of LINE-1s. Nat.
Commun. 11, 1–15
57. Grifﬁn, G.K. et al. (2021) Epigenetic silencing by SETDB1 suppresses tumour intrinsic immunogenicity. Nature 595, 309–314
58. Ozata, D.M. et al. (2019) PIWI-interacting RNAs: small RNAs
with big functions. Nat. Rev. Genet. 20, 89–108
59. Ernst, C. et al. (2017) The emergence of piRNAs against transposon invasion to preserve mammalian genome integrity. Nat.
Commun. 8, 1411
60. Morgan, H.D. et al. (2005) Epigenetic reprogramming in mammals. Hum. Mol. Genet. 14, R47–R58
61. Messerschmidt, D.M. et al. (2014) DNA methylation dynamics
during epigenetic reprogramming in the germline and preimplantation embryos. Genes Dev. 28, 812
62. Hajkova, P. et al. (2008) Chromatin dynamics during epigenetic
reprogramming in the mouse germ line. Nature 452, 877–881
63. Wu, Q. and Maniatis, T. (1999) A striking organization of a large family
of human neural cadherin-like cell adhesion genes. Cell 97, 779–790
64. Marques, A.C. et al. (2005) Emergence of young human genes
after a burst of retroposition in primates. PLoS Biol. 3, 1970–1979
65. Vinckenbosch, N. et al. (2006) Evolutionary fate of retroposed gene
copies in the human genome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 103,
3220–3225
66. Yurkovetskiy, L. et al. (2018) Primate immunodeﬁciency virus proteins Vpx and Vpr counteract transcriptional repression of proviruses by the HUSH complex. Nat. Microbiol. 3, 1354–1361
67. Imbeault, M. et al. (2017) KRAB zinc-ﬁnger proteins contribute to
the evolution of gene regulatory networks. Nature 543, 550–554

Trends in Genetics
OPEN ACCESS

68. Bateman, A. et al. (2021) UniProt: the universal protein
knowledgebase in 2021. Nucleic Acids Res. 49, D480–D489
69. Aravin, A. et al. (2006) A novel class of small RNAs bind to MILI
protein in mouse testes. Nature 442, 203–207
70. Aravin, A.A. et al. (2008) A piRNA pathway primed by individual
transposons is linked to de novo DNA methylation in mice. Mol.
Cell 31, 785–799
71. Lander, E.S. et al. (2001) Initial sequencing and analysis of the
human genome. Nature 409, 860–921
72. Bourque, G. et al. (2018) Ten things you should know about
transposable elements. Genome Biol. 19, 1–12
73. Wicker, T. et al. (2007) A uniﬁed classiﬁcation system for eukaryotic transposable elements. Nat. Rev. Genet. 8, 973–982
74. Rubin, G.M. et al. (1982) The molecular basis of P-M hybrid
dysgenesis: the nature of induced mutations. Cell 29, 987–994
75. Greenblatt, I.M. and Brink, R.A. (1963) Transpositions of modulator in maize into divided and undivided chromosome segments. Nature 197, 412–413
76. Brown, P.O. et al. (1987) Correct integration of retroviral DNA
in vitro. Cell 49, 347–356
77. Luan, D.D. et al. (1993) Reverse transcription of R2Bm RNA is
primed by a nick at the chromosomal target site: a mechanism
for non-LTR retrotransposition. Cell 72, 595–605
78. Cosby, R.L. et al. (2021) Recurrent evolution of vertebrate transcription factors by transposase capture. Science 371, eabc6405
79. Brennecke, J. et al. (2008) An epigenetic role for maternally inherited
piRNAs in transposon silencing. Science 322, 1387–1392
80. Yu, T. et al. (2019) The piRNA response to retroviral invasion of
the koala genome. Cell 179, 632–643.e12
81. Elgin, S.C.R. and Reuter, G. (2013) Position-effect variegation,
heterochromatin formation, and gene silencing in Drosophila.
Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 5, a017780
82. Keating, C.P. et al. (2009) The A-rich RNA sequences of HIV-1
pol are important for the synthesis of viral cDNA. Nucleic Acids
Res. 37, 945–956
83. Müller, V. and Bonhoeffer, S. (2005) Guanine–adenine bias: a
general property of retroid viruses that is unrelated to hostinduced hypermutation. Trends Genet. 21, 264–268
84. Kypr, J. and Mrázek, J. (1987) Unusual codon usage of HIV.
Nature 327, 20
85. Esnault, C. et al. (2000) Human LINE retrotransposons generate
processed pseudogenes. Nat. Genet. 24, 363–367

86. Greenwood, E.J.D. et al. (2019) Promiscuous targeting of cellular proteins by Vpr drives systems-level proteomic remodeling in
HIV-1 infection. Cell Rep. 27, 1579–1596.e7
87. Chougui, G. et al. (2018) HIV-2/SIV viral protein X counteracts
HUSH repressor complex. Nat. Microbiol. 3, 891–897
88. Kolosha, V.O. and Martin, S.L. (2003) High-afﬁnity, nonsequence-speciﬁc RNA binding by the open reading frame 1
(ORF1) protein from long interspersed nuclear element 1
(LINE-1). J. Biol. Chem. 278, 8112–8117
89. Doucet, A.J. et al. (2015) A 3′ poly(A) tract Is required for LINE-1
retrotransposition. Mol. Cell 60, 728–741
90. Kaessmann, H. et al. (2008) RNA-based gene duplication: mechanistic and evolutionary insights. Nat. Rev. Genet. 10, 19–31
91. Carelli, F.N. et al. (2016) The life history of retrocopies illuminates the
evolution of new mammalian genes. Genome Res. 26, 301
92. Zhang, Z. et al. (2004) Comparative analysis of processed
pseudogenes in the mouse and human genomes. Trends
Genet. 20, 62–67
93. Troskie, R.L. et al. (2021) Long-read cDNA sequencing
identiﬁes functional pseudogenes in the human transcriptome.
Genome Biol. 22, 146
94. Pan, D. and Zhang, L. (2009) Burst of young retrogenes and independent retrogene formation in mammals. PLoS One 4, e5040
95. Troskie, R.L. et al. (2021) Processed pseudogenes: a substrate
for evolutionary innovation. BioEssays 43, 2100186
96. Fablet, M. et al. (2009) Evolutionary origin and functions of
retrogene introns. Mol. Biol. Evol. 26, 2147–2156
97. Okamura, K. and Nakai, K. (2008) Retrotransposition as a
source of new promoters. Mol. Biol. Evol. 25, 1231–1238
98. Rosso, L. et al. (2008) Mitochondrial targeting adaptation of the
hominoid-speciﬁc glutamate dehydrogenase driven by positive
Darwinian selection. PLoS Genet. 4, e1000150
99. Rosso, L. et al. (2008) Birth and rapid subcellular adaptation of
a hominoid-speciﬁc CDC14 protein. PLoS Biol. 6, 1281–1291
100. Rohozinski, J. et al. (2006) UTP14c is a recently acquired
retrogene associated with spermatogenesis and fertility in
man. Biol. Reprod. 74, 644–651
101. Rohozinski, J. (2017) Lineage-independent retrotransposition of
UTP14 associated with male fertility has occurred multiple times
throughout mammalian evolution. R. Soc. Open Sci. 4, 171049
102. Lingenfelter, P.A. et al. (2001) Expression and conservation of processed copies of the RBMX gene. Mamm. Genome 12, 538–545

Trends in Genetics, April 2023, Vol. 39, No. 4

267

